31892

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

A Spatiotemporal Information-Driven
Cross-Attention Model With Sparse Representation
for GNSS NLOS Signal Classification
Kungan Zeng , Zhenni Li , Haoli Zhao , Kan Xie , Member, IEEE,
Shengli Xie , Fellow, IEEE, Dusit Niyato , Fellow, IEEE, Wuhui Chen , Member, IEEE,
and Zibin Zheng , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Global navigation satellite systems (GNSSs) provide
efficient positioning services for location-aware Internet of Things
(IoT) devices. However, GNSS non-line-of-sight (NLOS) signals
can result in severe positioning errors in urban canyon areas.
Existing deep-learning-based NLOS signal classification methods
cannot appropriately model the spatiotemporal information of
NLOS interference, resulting in limited accuracy across multiple
locations. This study presents a spatiotemporal informationdriven model that can capture environmental characteristics and
signal temporal information simultaneously to improve NLOS
classification accuracy across multiple locations. First, a visualization analysis of the signal distribution across multiple locations
demonstrates the impact of environmental characteristics. In
addition, the significance of both the spatial environmental
features and the signal temporal features for NLOS classification
is clarified by constructing a tree diagram of the data set.
Second, we propose an airspace attention mechanism module
and a long short-term memory (LSTM)-based temporal feature
extraction module to model both types of features, respectively.
Manuscript received 17 May 2024; revised 11 June 2024; accepted
26 June 2024. Date of publication 4 July 2024; date of current version 25 September 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62273106, Grant
62203122, Grant 62320106008, Grant 62373114, and Grant 62203123; in
part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation
under Grant 2023A1515011480 and Grant 2023A1515011159; and in
part by the National Key Research and Development Plan-Strategic
Scientific and Technological Innovation Cooperation Key Project under Grant
2023YFE0209400. (Corresponding author: Zhenni Li.)
Kungan Zeng is with the School of Automation, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China, and also with the School of Software
and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai 519082, China (e-mail:
zengkg@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Zhenni Li is with the School of Automation and the Guangdong–Hong
Kong–Macao Joint Laboratory for Smart Discrete Manufacturing, Guangdong
University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: lizhenni2012@
gmail.com).
Haoli Zhao is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University
of Technology, Tianjin 300401, China (e-mail: zhaohli1989@hotmail.com).
Kan Xie is with the School of Automation and the Guangdong Key
Laboratory of IoT Information Technology, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: kxie@gdut.edu.cn).
Shengli Xie is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Detection and The
Internet of Things in Manufacturing and the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Information Processing and System Integration of IoT, Ministry of Education,
Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
shlxie@gdut.edu.cn).
Dusit Niyato is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (e-mail: dniyato@ntu.edu.sg).
Wuhui Chen and Zibin Zheng are with the School of Software and
Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai 519000, China (e-mail: chenwuh@mail.sysu.edu.cn; zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3423016

Third, the learnable sparse regularizer is utilized to reduce
feature redundancy and thereby realize a sparse representation, which improves model generalization performance. Finally,
the spatiotemporal information-driven cross-attention model is
developed to perform NLOS classification, which uses a crossattention fusion strategy to integrate the two modules. We use
real-world data sets collected across multiple urban canyon
locations to test our model. Experiments show that the proposed
model can achieve 98% classification accuracy across multiple
locations. Generalization performance in unknown environments
can be improved over 7% compared to several state-of-the-art
models.
Index Terms—Global navigation satellite systems (GNSSs),
long short-term memory (LSTM), sparse representation, spatiotemporal information, transformer.

I. I NTRODUCTION
OCATION awareness has become an essential requirement for various Internet of Things (IoT) applications
[1]. Global navigation satellite systems (GNSSs), such as GPS,
Galileo, GLONASS, and BDS, have played a crucial role in
providing accurate and robust positioning services for IoT
applications in outdoor environments, making them a costeffective location solution [2], [3]. Nevertheless, the quality
of received GNSS signals is easily affected by surrounding environments. Although most interference errors (e.g.,
atmospheric delays, satellite orbit bias, and satellite clock
errors) can be mitigated by statistical methods or differencing,
the interference caused by non-line-of-sight (NLOS) signals
or polluted line-of-sight (LOS) signals remains a challenge.
Particularly in urban canyons, NLOS interference introduces
an unexpected bias to GNSS measurements, deteriorating
positioning accuracy [4], [5]. The reception of NLOS signals
occurs when the propagation path of satellite signals is
obstructed by high-rise builds. Because of the extra transmission path, NLOS signals can generate severe positioning
errors [6], [7]. Hence, discriminating NLOS signals is crucial
to reducing NLOS interference error in GNSS positioning.
Usually, NLOS signals can be distinguished by satellite elevation angle (EL) or signal strength. However, it
is easy to make incorrect distinctions when dealing with
complex urban canyon environments. For example, NLOS
multipath interference may result in the received NLOS signal
strength being close to the received LOS signal strength.

L

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2327-4662 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION-DRIVEN CROSS-ATTENTION MODEL WITH SPARSE REPRESENTATION

A slim, high-rise building might block the satellites with
high ELs. Many studies have addressed this problem using,
for example, 3DMA shadow matching [8], [9] and 3-D ray
tracing [10], [11]. However, these methods involve creating
3-D models of buildings, which requires an abundance of
computational resources. Recently, machine-learning methods
have been proposed as a tool for classifying GNSS satellite signals, such as decision trees (DTs), support vector
machines (SVMs), and artificial neural networks (ANNs) [12].
The existing studies can be divided into two categories
depending on the input resource, correlator-based approaches
and GNSS measurement-based approaches [13]. Although
correlator-based approaches [13], [14], [15] perform well
in GNSS signal classification, the correlator output must
be obtained through software-defined reception (SDR). In
contrast to correlator-based approaches, GNSS measurementbased approaches can utilize observation features obtained
directly from GNSS receivers (e.g., carrier-to-noise, phase,
and pseudorange residual) to perform the classification. For
example, Hsu [12] used machine-learning methods to perform
GNSS signal classification based on GNSS measurements. A
convolutional neural network (CNN)-based multipath detection method for GPS high-precision positioning is presented
in [16]. As a data-driven approach, deep-learning algorithms
need sufficient features to be able to learn sample distributions. However, the limited observation features of satellite
signals cannot accurately reflect NLOS/multipath interference
when facing complex environmental conditions [17]. Deeplearning-based methods cannot then achieve satisfactory
classification accuracy across multiple locations or different
scenes [16], [18].
NLOS interference is influenced by both the incident satellite signal and the surrounding environment. The continuous
movement of satellites alters the incidence status of the
signals, leading to dynamic changes in NLOS interference
over time, which we refer to as “signal temporal features”
in this study. Furthermore, since the physical spatial environment determines the propagation path of satellite signals,
the measurements of captured satellite signals at the same
epoch can reflect the environmental context [19], [20], which
we call the “spatial environmental features” in this study.
Some current studies focus on learning the instantaneous
features of signals for NLOS classification [12], [21], while
others utilized the temporal information of signals to perform multipath/NLOS classification [22], [23]. Additionally,
existing research has shown that incorporating environmental
information can enhance NLOS signal classification models
[24]. However, when dealing with NLOS classification across
multiple locations, both the signal temporal features and
the spatial environmental features are present simultaneously.
Failing to represent both of these features can limit the
classification accuracy of models. To our knowledge, no
existing studies explicitly propose to model the spatiotemporal
information of NLOS interference from GNSS measurements to address NLOS signal classification across multiple
locations.
In this study, a spatiotemporal information-driven crossattention model with sparse representation is proposed to

31893

perform NLOS classification across multiple locations. First,
a visualization analysis of NLOS and LOS signal distributions across multiple locations is conducted to demonstrate
the impact of surrounding environmental characteristics. In
addition, the significance of the spatial environmental features
and signal temporal features in NLOS signal classification is
clarified by constructing a tree diagram. Second, we propose
using an airspace attention mechanism (AAM) module and
an long short-term memory (LSTM)-based temporal features
extraction (LSTM-TFE) module to learn the representation
of the spatial environmental features and signal temporal
features, respectively. Third, the learnable sparse regularizer
is adopted to reduce feature redundancy and thereby realize a
sparse representation, which improves the model’s generalization performance. Finally, a spatiotemporal information-driven
cross-attention model with sparse representation is developed
to perform NLOS signal classification using a cross-attention
fusion strategy to integrate the two modules. We use real-world
data sets, which are collected across multiple urban canyon
locations, to test the model’s performance. Experiments show
that the proposed model can achieve 98% classification accuracy across multiple locations. Generalization performance
in unknown environments can be improved by more than
7% compared to several state-of-the-art models. The main
contributions of our work are summarized as follows.
1) To model the spatiotemporal information of NLOS signals, we propose constructing both a spatial channel and
a temporal channel within the model. The spatial channel
utilizes the measurements of all captured satellite signals
at the current epoch as input, while the temporal channel
utilizes the historical measurements of each satellite as
input. We then develop the AAM module to extract spatial environmental features from satellite sets/sequences
and introduce the LSTM-TFE module to capture signal
temporal features from historical epochs.
2) To reduce feature redundancy, we propose using the
learnable sparse regularizer to obtain a sparse representation of the representation vectors. This enables
the model to focus on critical features and improve
model generalization performance in other unknown
urban canyon environments.
3) Based on the spatiotemporal information obtained by the
two modules and the learnable sparse regularizer, the
spatiotemporal information-driven cross-attention model
with sparse representation is developed by using a crossattention fusion strategy to integrate the two modules.
The proposed model obtains environmental characteristics and signal temporal information simultaneously to
perform NLOS classification. Experiments show that it
can achieve 98% classification accuracy across multiple
locations. Generalization performance in unknown environments can be improved over 7% compared to several
state-of-the-art models.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II addresses related work. Section III gives a detailed
introduction to our model. Section IV demonstrates experimental studies comprehensively. Section V concludes this
article.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

31894

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 1.
Four static locations for GNSS data collection in Guangzhou
urban canyons. For the Earth-centered, Earth-fixed coordinate system (ECEF),
the coordinate of location 1 is (−2322470.13, 5389797.18, 2489382.04).
Location 2 is (−2322304.29, 5389659.43, 2489578.83). Location 3 is
(−2322456.76, 5389755.08, 2489415.00). Location 4 is (−2322405.67,
5389818.94, 2489474.12).

II. R ELATED W ORK
Previous studies have mainly tried to use machine-learning
methods to learn the representation of signals’ instantaneous
or temporal features from the correlator or GNSS measurements to perform signal recognition [13]. In [14] and [25],
the correlator outputs are mapped as 2-D images and fed
to a CNN for multipath detection. Considering the shape
of the multicorrelator outputs is distorted due to multipath
interference, Suzuki and Amano [15] used SVM and ANN
to extract features to discriminate NLOS/multipath signals.
Hsu [12] used SVM to classify LOS, NLOS, and multipath
signals by several features (e.g., signal-to-noise ratio and
pseudorange residuals) as the input. These studies above focus
on learning the instantaneous features of the target signal
to perform classification. Considering the temporal variation
of signals, Quan et al. [16] proposed using current and
n − 1 previous successive observations to detect multipath
interference in the latest observation. Tao et al. [22] presented
a CNN-LSTM model to learn the deep multipath features
from coordinate series to predict positioning error in GNSS
short baseline positioning. However, the dynamic change
of the surrounding environment raises a challenge to the
classification performance of models across multiple locations.
The GNSS measurements of captured satellites at the same
epoch reflect the surrounding environmental characteristics,
which can contribute to location context prediction. For
example, Gao and Groves [19] presented an environmental
context detection framework for adaptive navigation, which
uses a hidden Markov model to extract features from measurements to predict the current environment context categories.
Xu et al. [20] presented a sky visibility estimation based on
GNSS satellite visibility, which utilizes GNSS measurements
and ephemeris data to estimate sky outline, building outline,
and building boundary. Moreover, Zhang et al. [24] first

Fig. 2. NLOS and LOS signals’ distribution at four locations. (The feature
space is built based on EL, carrier-to-noise (C/N0 ), and pseudorange residual.)
(a) Location 1. (b) Location 2. (c) Location 3. (d) Location 4.

proposed to use the LSTM network to learn environmental
information from captured satellites at the same epoch to aid
the prediction of satellite visibility. Li et al. [26] suggested
employing a Transformer-based network for NLOS classification. These studies proved the significance of learning
environmental features in NLOS classification. Nevertheless,
existing studies still focus on the representation of a single
aspect feature.
In this study, we propose a spatiotemporal informationdriven model to simultaneously learn signal temporal features
and spatial environmental features, aiming to improve NLOS
signal classification across multiple locations. The proposed
model utilizes the AAM module and the LSTM-TFE module
to capture these features. We then employ a cross-attention
fusion strategy to integrate the outputs of the two modules.
Additionally, we adopt a learnable sparse regularizer to reduce
feature redundancy, enhancing the model’s generalization
performance.
III. S PATIOTEMPORAL I NFORMATION -D RIVEN
C ROSS -ATTENTION M ODEL W ITH S PARSE
R EPRESENTATION
In this section, we first visualize the distribution of GNSS
signals (NLOS and LOS) collected across multiple urban
canyon locations to demonstrate the impact of environmental
characteristics and clarify the significance of both the spatial
environmental features and the signal temporal features in
NLOS recognition by constructing a tree diagram. Next,
we present an AAM module and an LSTM-TFE module to
learn the representation of the spatial environmental features
and signal temporal features, respectively. Then, a learnable
sparse regularizer is adopted to reduce the feature redundancy
and improve the model’s generalization performance. Finally,
a spatiotemporal information-driven model is developed by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION-DRIVEN CROSS-ATTENTION MODEL WITH SPARSE REPRESENTATION

Fig. 3.

31895

Mixed distribution of NLOS and LOS signals from four locations.
TABLE I
N OTATION

Fig. 4.

Tree diagram construction of the data set from multiple locations.

Fig. 5.

Illustration of the LSTM-based temporal feature extraction module.

using a cross-attention fusion strategy to integrate the two
modules.
A. Notation
In this article, we denote boldface uppercase letter W as a
weight matrix. b denotes the bias. Most of the notations have
been clarified in the main text or corresponding figures. Some
important notations are listed in Table I.
B. Analysis of NLOS and LOS Signal Distributions Across
Multiple Locations
We visualized the distribution of NLOS and LOS signals
from multiple urban canyon locations to demonstrate the
impact of environmental characteristics. As shown in Fig. 1,
we collected GNSS signals at four locations on two streets.
The labels of signals are determined by a fish-eye camera [26].
We obtained observation features (EL, carrier-to-noise, and
pseudorange residual) from GNSS measurements. These features can represent NLOS interference well and are often
considered as input to NLOS detection models [18]. Here, we
build a feature space using these three features to visualize
signal distribution. As shown in Fig. 2, the sample distributions of location 1 and location 2 are partially similar. The
same case is for location 3 and location 4. The GNSS signals
from the same street show a partially similar distribution due
to the similar surrounding environment. However, location 1

and location 2 differ exactly from location 3 and location 4
as the environmental characteristics vary. As shown in Fig. 3,
the distributions of NLOS and LOS become complicated when
all samples are projected into the same feature space. We can
find that the overlap of NLOS and LOS samples is apparent
in the feature space. Based on the above observation, some
key points can be summarized as follows.
1) The surrounding environmental characteristics of locations have a crucial impact on the distribution of NLOS
and LOS signals.
2) GNSS signals with different labels from multiple locations can easily have highly similar practical-valued

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

31896

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

vectors when using observation features as the input,
which easily results in recognition failure for models.
Consequently, deep-learning-based models cannot achieve
satisfactory classification accuracy across multiple locations
when the target signal’s observation features are as input. To
improve NLOS classification across multiple locations, it is
essential to extract environmental characteristics from GNSS
measurements.
C. Data Construction Analysis Using Tree Diagram
To motivate our study, we construct a tree diagram of
the data set to demonstrate the significance of both the
spatial environmental features and signal temporal features in
NLOS recognition. The data set D = {D1 , D2 , D3 , . . . , Dm }
is collected at m locations, and t epochs are recorded at each
location. We can get the epoch sets Di = {e1 , e2 , e3 , . . . , et }.
The number of GNSS signals captured at each epoch is n. The
satellite set/sequence at each epoch is ej = {s1 , s2 , s3 , . . . , sn }.
For each satellite, we can get a list of observation features [EL, azimuth (Az), . . . , carrier-to-noise (C/N0 )] from
GNSS measurements, namely, the instantaneous features. The
instantaneous features in GNSS measurements represent the
observation characteristics at the current epoch. Since these
features are discrete in the time dimension, we refer to them as
instantaneous features. Thus, the data set D tree diagram can
be constructed as Fig. 4. As mentioned in Section III-B, when
only using the instantaneous features as the input of models, it
is easy to find two different types of signals with highly similar
practical-valued vectors, which will result in the failure of
correct recognition. Therefore, to improve NLOS classification
across multiple locations, extending additional features to
enhance the representation of signals is crucial. In other words,
we must enlarge the distance between samples in the feature
space to avoid overlap. From the tree diagram of the data
set, each sample in the tree structure contains three levels of
features: 1) signal temporal features; 2) spatial environmental
features; and 3) instantaneous features. Most studies only
consider the instantaneous features as the input. However,
the single-level feature makes it challenging to express the
specificity of samples in the data set structure. Furthermore,
as another point summarized in Section III-A, the location’s
environmental characteristics mainly decide the distribution
of GNSS signals. Thus, adding the signal temporal features
and the spatial environmental features can aid the model in
performing recognition more precisely. Generally, to improve
NLOS classification across multiple locations, the proposed
model should fulfill some key requirements as follows.
1) The model is able to extract the signal temporal features
from signal historical epochs. It can identify the category
of the target signal at the current epoch by referring to
historical information.
2) The model can learn a reasoned representation of environmental characteristics from the satellite set/sequence,
thereby learning the spatial environmental features to
facilitate signal classification.
3) The fusion of both types of features is crucial for
allowing the model to adapt to dynamic changes in both

environments and incident signal status. It is necessary
to adopt an effective fusion strategy. In addition, combining features from multiple domains easily results in
feature redundancy, which decreases model generalization performance. Therefore, reducing redundancy is an
important issue for the model.
Therefore, our following work will be motivated by these
requirements.
D. LSTM-Based Temporal Feature Extraction Module
The observation values of LOS signals are usually more
stable because the propagation path is almost consistent in
physical spatial. On the contrary, the propagation path for
NLOS signals is complex. When the angle of the signal
changes, the observation values also change immediately.
Therefore, the signal temporal features can reflect NLOS
interference. Motivated by related works [23], we develop an
LSTM-TFE module to capture signal historical information.
As shown in Fig. 5, we first obtain the historical epochs of
the target signal (x1 , x2 , . . . , xt ). A fixed-length slide window
intercepts the epoch segment (xt−n , . . . , xt−1 , xt ) from the
previous n epochs to the current epoch. We then construct
a temporal feature extraction module to learn historical
information from the segment. LSTM networks, as a kind
of recurrent neural network (RNN), can learn long-term
dependencies, which is widely used to address the information
persistence problem in various deep-learning tasks [27]. Here,
we utilize LSTM networks to understand the temporal changes
of signals and compress them in the time domain to gain the
representation vector ht , thereby helping the model identify
the type of the target signal at the current epoch based on
historical information.
E. Airspace Attention Mechanism Module
The surrounding environment of locations has a significant
impact on received GNSS signals. When the high-rise building
in urban canyons blocks the direct path from satellites to
the GNSS receiver, the receiver will capture NLOS signals
instead of LOS signals. Thus, the sky occlusion situation above
positions is a crucial factor in determining the category of
received signals. In other words, the distribution of NLOS
and LOS signals on the sky view of the current position
reflects environmental characteristics. As the exact distribution
of NLOS and LOS signals is unknown, we compute the
relevance among satellite signals to express the distribution
status. We therefore present the AAM to obtain environmental
characteristics. As shown in Fig. 6, we proposed using the
self-attention mechanism to compute the relevance among
satellite signals [26]. The self-attention mechanism has been
successfully used to learn the abstract representation between
words in natural language sequences [28]. This study regards
all captured satellites in the current epoch as a sequence.
The self-attention module can determine attention weight
among satellite signals by computing their similarity in hidden dimensions. First, we obtain the satellite set/sequence
in each epoch. An embedding layer is used to extend the
dimension size of feature vectors. Next, the embedded vectors

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION-DRIVEN CROSS-ATTENTION MODEL WITH SPARSE REPRESENTATION

Fig. 6.

31897

Illustration of the airspace attention module. The sky view represents the boundary between buildings and the open sky.

(a1 , a2 , a3 , . . . , an ) will be transferred to the self-attention
block. In the self-attention mechanism, each input will be
mapped into query (q), key (k), and value (v) by linear
projections. We compute the dot products of the query with
all keys to get the output (a1,1 , a1,2 , a1,3 , . . . , a1,n ). Then, the
output will be conducted by a scale and softmax operation
to gain the attention weight (a1,1 , a1,2 , a1,3 , . . . , a1,n ). In the
AAM, the attention weight can express the status of the current
sky view, because it is obtained by computing the relevance
between satellite signals in classification learning. Finally, the
airspace attention representation vectors (f1 , f2 , f3 , . . . , fn ) can
be obtained by computing the dot products of the attention
weight with the corresponding value (v).
F. Learnable Sparse Regularizer for Reducing Feature
Redundancy
This study proposes to associate environmental characteristics and signal temporal information to boost NLOS
classification. There is a high risk of feature redundancy
when combining features from multiple domains, which can
decrease the model’s generalization performance. Sparse representation can improve the robustness and stability of neural
networks by focusing on some crucial features [29], [30]. It
has been widely used in the fields of signal processing and
computer vision [31], [32]. Therefore, in this study, a learnable
sparse regularizer [33] is used to reduce feature redundancy
by imposing a constraint on the activation function. The
learnable sparse regularizer is able to learn data-driven sparse
representations, which is defined as
⎧
2 

w1 (b2 −b1 )
1
1
⎪
z+
−
+
b
−
⎪
2
2w
2
w
⎪
2
⎪
⎨ w1 (w21 −w2 )
2
(1)
Sp(z) =  2w2 (b2 − b1 ) , z ≥ w1 (b2 − b1 )
⎪
1
1 2
⎪
z
−
+
b
z,
0
≤
z
<
w
−
b
(b
)
⎪
1
1
2
1
2w
2
⎪
1
⎩
Sp(−z), z < o

where w1 , w2 , b1 , and b2 are the learnable parameters. In
neural network models, the regularizer can be considered an
activation function (z), which can be given as
⎧
w2 (z − b2 ) + w1 (b2 − b1 ), b2 ≤ z
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ w1 (z − b1 ), b1 ≤ z < b2
 = 0, −b1 ≤ z < b1
(2)
⎪
⎪
⎪ w1 (z + b1 ), −b2 ≤ z < −b1
⎪
⎩
w2 (z + b2 ) + w1 (b1 − b2 ), z < −b2
where the learned parameters w1 , w2 , b1 , and b2 are updated
with the weight matrix of the model simultaneously. For a
better sparsity performance, we conduct the Sp(z) operation
three times. Namely, the output of the previous layer is the
input of the next layer. The learned parameters need to satisfy
w1 , w2 > 0, 0 ≤ b1 ≤ b2 and Sp(z) is nondecreasing when
z ≥ w1 (b2 − b1 ).
G. Spatiotemporal Information-Driven Model Based on
Cross-Attention Fusion Strategy
The proposed AAM module and LSTM-TFE module can
extract the spatial environmental features and the signal temporal features from GNSS measurements, respectively. The next
critical step is to fuse both types of features. For deep-learning
models, a direct way to combine features is to concatenate representation vectors. However, the concatenation cannot enable
two features from different domains to interact effectively [34].
The temporal features are extracted from the historical data of
the target satellite. The spatial features are computed using all
other satellites at the current epoch. Thus, we need to align
the features from different domains for a reasoned fusion.
Motivated by the cross-attention transformer [35], [36], [37],
we propose using a cross-attention fusion strategy to integrate
both types of features. The cross-attention fusion strategy
utilizes the temporal domain features as the query to compute
the attention weight with the key–value pairs from the spatial

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

31898

Fig. 7.

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

Illustration of the spatiotemporal information-driven cross-attention model with sparse representation.

domain. The fused features can be obtained by the multihead
attention (MHA) block.
Based on the cross-attention fusion strategy, we develop a
spatiotemporal information-driven cross-attention model with
sparse representation, as shown in Fig. 7. First, we construct
corresponding input channels for two proposed modules. The
captured satellite sets/sequences in each epoch are the input
of the AAM module, which is called the spatial channel.
The target signal’s historical n epochs are the input of
the LSTM-TFE module, namely, the temporal channel. We
utilize the LSTM-TFE module to learn the temporal features
from the historical data. The LSTM networks can memorize
helpful information in each epoch and generate the hidden
state by compressing the input dimension. The representation
vector of the temporal features contains the signal’s historical
information and the instantaneous features. Note that the
embedding layer is contained in the LSTM network cell. At the
same time, the spatial channel transfers the satellite sequence
to the Embedding layer for extending the dimension size of
feature vectors. The AAM module will compute the attention
weight among signals by the MHA block. The remaining
components of the AAM module are the same as the base
transformer’s encoder structure. We thus can obtain the signal
temporal features and spatial environmental features from the
two modules. Next, the representation vector of the signal
temporal features will be regarded as the query of the MHA
block. The representation vector of the spatial environmental
features will be used as the key–value pairs. The MHA
block conducts fusion processing. Then, the fused feature
representation vector is transferred to a sparse regularization
block to solve the feature redundancy problem. Finally, the
Classifier gives a prediction for the target signal.

For a signal sample s(a1 , a2 , a3 , . . . , ai ), where ai means
the observation feature selected from GNSS measurements.
We then construct two input channels. The temporal channel
is T(st−n , . . . , st−1 , st ). The spatial channel can be denoted
as S(s1 , s2 , s3 , . . . , sk ). Note that k is the number of captured
satellite signals, and k = 3 in Fig. 7 is just for convenient
illustration. As shown in Fig. 5, each step in the LSTM-TFE
module can be formulated as

ft = σ W f ht−1 , st + bf

it = σ W i ht−1 , st + bi

Ct = tanh W C ht−1 , st + bC

(3)
(4)

Ct = ft  Ct−1 + it  Ct

ot = σ W o ht−1 , st + bo

(6)
(7)

ht = ot  tanh Ct

(8)

(5)

where ft is the output of the forget gate layer, which decides
what should be overlooked in the previous cell state Ct−1 .
σ denotes sigmoid activation function. W f and bf are the
weight matrix of the layer and bias.  denotes element-wise
multiplication. Ct is the new content from the current input.
it controls how much information will be selected from Ct .
Ct and it compose the input gate layer. Then, the current cell
state Ct can be updated by these two gates. ot decides the
output ht , which is the output gate layer. After the n steps, the
LSTM-TFE module can generate the representation vector of
the temporal features ht , where the historical information is
contained [38].
For the AAM module, the spatial channel input
S(s1 , s2 , s3 , . . . , sk ) is first transferred to the embedding layer,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION-DRIVEN CROSS-ATTENTION MODEL WITH SPARSE REPRESENTATION

31899

Fig. 8. Illustration of location distribution. We collected data from multiple urban canyon locations, marking red points for the training set and blue points
for the test set. The demonstrated four locations are contained in the test set in the out-domain data set.

Next, the matrices Q, K, and V are inputted to the Scale DotProduct Attention, which can be formulated as

QK T
V.
(11)
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax √
dk
Then, the output of heads will be concatenated together and
transferred to a linear projection, which can be formulated as
MultiHead(Q, K, V) = Concat(H1 , . . . , Hh )W l

Hi = Attention Qi , K i , V i

Fig. 9.
Illustration of location distribution for GNSS data collection in
Guangzhou urban canyons. The sky images recorded by the fish-eye camera
display the open sky and blocked areas. These five locations are the training
set in the out-domain data set.

which can be given as
X = W em S + bem

(9)

where W em denotes the embedding layer weight matrix, and
bem is the bias. We can get the mapping result X. The AAM
module is based on the encoder of the transformer. The selfattention mechanism is realized with the MHA block. The q, k,
and v come from the same resource X and are obtained by the
Linear projections. The MHA block computes the attention
function on a set of them simultaneously, packed together into
matrices Q, K, and V. It can be given as
Q = W q X + bq
V = W v X + bv .

Fin = Norm(X + MultiHead(X))
Fout = θ FN (Fin )
hs = Norm(Fout + Fin )

(14)
(15)
(16)

where Norm denotes the layer normalization operation. θ FN
denotes the function of the Feed Forward Network, Fin denotes
its input, and Fout is the output. The fusion processing is realized
by the MAH block. As mentioned previously, the LSTM-TFE
module can extract the temporal features of the target signal
and generate the alignment point by compressing the temporal
dimension. Therefore, we consider the representation vector of
the temporal features as the query, and the output of the AAM
module as the key–value pairs. The self-attention mechanism
is employed to realize the interaction between spatial features
and temporal features. It is given as follows:
q

(10)

(13)

where W l is the weight matrix of the linear layer. Hi is
the output of heads. h denotes the number of heads. Finally,
the output of the MAH block goes through the Add&Norm
operation and the Feed Forward network to generate the
representation vector of the spatial environment features hs .
The process can be formulated as

Q = W · ht + bq

K = W k X + bk

(12)

k

K = W · hs + bk

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

31900

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

TABLE II
D ESCRIPTION OF DATA S ETS

v

V = W · hs + bv

Z = MultiHead Q, K, V .

(17)
(18)

For the next step, we impose a learned sparse regularizer [33] on the output of fusion block Z. The detailed
formulation can be found in Section III-F. The Classifier
consists of three fully connected layers. Since the task is binary
classification, we adopt the sigmoid function as the activation
function of the final layer in Classifier. The loss is computed
with the cross-entropy formulation. Thus, the loss function can
be given as
1
{yi log y(xi ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − y(xi )}
=−
N
N

(19)

i=1

where y represents the formulation of the model. xi is the input
of the model, and yi is the corresponding label. Mini-batch
gradient descent is adopted to optimize the loss function [39].
IV. E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY
In this section, data preparation is first introduced. We
construct two data sets for experiments: the in-domain data
set and the out-domain data set. In addition, to clarify feature
selection processing, we analyze the distribution of observation
values used as input features. Second, we provide some implementation details including training settings and evaluation
metrics. Third, we conduct model variation by changing the
shape of the networks to find reasoned hyperparameters for the
model. Fourth, we implement a comparative experiment using
several existing models. The comparison results are shown
and analyzed. After that, we conduct ablation experiments by
changing the fusion strategy and moving out of the sparse
optimization block. Finally, we investigate the significance
of the time length of the temporal channel on classification
performance.
A. Data Preparation
We collected real-world data from multiple urban canyon
locations in Guangzhou, China. The GNSS measurements of
multiple constellation systems, including Beidou, GPS, and
Galileo, are recorded by two GNSS receivers (Ublox F9P) with
professional external antennas. A reference station and a rover
station are built with two receivers to perform differencing.
In our previous work, we presented a GNSS signal labeling
method based on fish-eye camera projection to distinguish
NLOS and LOS signals [26]. As shown in Figs. 8 and 9, we
collected GNSS satellite signals from a total of 27 locations.

These locations were selected from different streets, each
exhibiting distinct sky occlusions, indicating varying levels of
environmental interference. We constructed two experimental
data sets: 1) an in-domain data set and 2) an out-domain
data set. The in-domain data set includes training and test
data from the same locations, allowing us to evaluate the
model’s classification performance across multiple locations.
The ratio of training to test data in this data set is 7:3. The outdomain data set uses data from 22 locations for the training
set and five different locations for the test set. The training
and test sets are sourced from different streets, which helps us
assess the model’s generalization performance in unfamiliar
environments. Table II provides a detailed description of these
data sets.
Traditional methods usually use C/N0 or El to determine
NLOS signals. Nevertheless, the distribution of these observation values shows a complex case in urban canyons. As shown
in Fig. 10, the C/N0 of NLOS signals mainly focus on 30 dB.
For half of LOS signals, C/N0 is more than 35 dB. However,
the overlap still exists between 30 and 35 dB, which results in
failure distinction on them. Similarly, the EL cannot give an
accurate distinction between NLOS and LOS signals. From the
distribution of pseudorange residual (PRE), NLOS and LOS
signals show a similar pattern. And the PRE of LOS signals
is usually close to 0. It can help us to identify signal types.
Generally, these crucial observation features partly reflect
the difference between NLOS and LOS signals. A single
observation feature is insufficient for accurately recognizing
NLOS signals. Therefore, this study uses several observation
features selected from GNSS measurements to identify NLOS
signals. The selected features consist of carrier-to-noise, EL,
azimuth angle, and pseudorange residual. We conducted a
feature scaling operation to enable model learning to be more
stable.
1) Carrier-to-noise ratio denotes the noise power density
at the receiver front-end, which is the received signal’s
strength. It reflects the quality of received signals. In
most cases, the strength of LOS signals is stronger than
NLOS signals.
2) The EL is widely used to determine the reference
satellite during GNSS positioning. The satellite with a
higher EL is less probably to be blocked by obstacles.
It means that the EL is related to the types of satellites.
The EL can be estimated based on El = arcsin(ûsv /r̂).
ûsv is the length of the “Up” component of the satellite
position in East–North–Up (ENU) coordinate to the
receiver position, and r̂ is the range between the satellite
and receiver.
3) The azimuth angle is another important feature that
indicates the spatial location of satellites. It is useful to
compute the relevance between satellites in this study.
Az = arctan(êsv /n̂sv ). êsv and n̂sv are the lengths of the
East and North components of the satellite position in
the ENU coordinate relative to the receiver position.
4) The pseudorange residual is considered one of the
features as it reflects the NLOS error caused by the environment. The iterative least squares estimation method
is widely used to calculate the GNSS receiver position,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION-DRIVEN CROSS-ATTENTION MODEL WITH SPARSE REPRESENTATION

31901

Fig. 10. C/N0 , EL, and pseudorange residual of four locations. (The first row is the distribution of C/N0 at four locations. The second row is EL. The third
row is pseudorange residual.)

which can be formulated as x = (H T H)−1 H T  ρ. x
includes the bias from the initial guess and the receiver
clock. H is usually referred to as the geometry matrix.
ρ is the vector of the difference between pseudorange
measurements and geometric distance from the initial
guess to the satellites. All available measurements will
be used to optimize the result by iterative methods [40].
The convergence is determined by the pseudorange
residual as ε = ρ − H · x.
B. Implementation Details
1) Training Settings: Our networks are built with the
TensorFlow framework. All experiments are implemented on
a server with two NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 Ti 12-GB
GPUs. The batch size is 16. We adopt the Adam [41] optimizer
to update model parameters. For the Adam optimizer, the
arguments, β1 and β2 , are set as 0.9 and 0.98. The learning
rate is 0.001.
2) Evaluation Metrics: To validate the performance of
trained models, we use Accuracy, Recall, Precision, and
F1 scores for comprehensive evaluation [42], which are formulated as follows:
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
TP
Precision =
TP + FP
TP
Recall =
TP + FN

Accuracy =

(20)
(21)
(22)

F1 =

2 × precision × recall
.
precision + recall

(23)

Performance measurement true positive (TP), true negative
(TN), false positive (FP), and false negative (FN) are the
parameters used in the evaluation of specificity, sensitivity,
and accuracy. TP is the number of LOS signals correctly
recognized by the model. Similarly, TN is the number of
NLOS signals correctly recognized. FP is the number of
wrongly recognized samples as LOS signals that are actually
NLOS. FN is the number of wrongly recognized NLOS signals
that are actually LOS signals. Accuracy is the percentage of
correctly identified cases. Precision is also known as positive
predictive value. Recall is known as sensitivity in diagnostic
binary classification. F1 score is the harmonic mean of the
precision and recall, which symmetrically represents both
precision and recall in one metric.
C. Model Variation
The shape of networks is an essential factor that determines
the performance of deep-learning models, namely, the number of layers and the dimension of layers. In addition, the
dropout rate can prevent neural networks from overfitting [43].
Therefore, hyperparameter optimization is conducted in terms
of these three variations. As shown in Table III, nine models
were developed with different variations. Heads denotes the
number of heads for the MHA block. We conducted experiments using 1, 2, and 4 heads, respectively. d_ff represents the
hidden dimension of the Feed Forward block, with values of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

31902

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

TABLE III
VARIATIONS ON THE S PATIOTEMPORAL I NFORMATION -D RIVEN M ODEL . U NLISTED VALUES A RE I DENTICAL TO T HOSE OF THE BASE M ODEL

64, 128, and 256 used in our experiments. d_hidden denotes
the hidden dimension of the corresponding block (MHA and
LSTM cell). Additionally, we varied the dropout rate and
the number of MHA layers in our variation experiments. We
compare their performance based on the out-domain data set.
First, M1, M2, and M3 are designed with different numbers
of attention heads for the MHA block. Evaluation metrics
show M1 gets better results than the other two. Although
multiple heads in many cases can enable the model to learn
more information by extending sub-space, it also increases the
complexity of the model, resulting in a larger generalization
error. Thus, the increase of heads in the MHA block cannot
improve the model’s generalization performance on the outdomain data set. Second, from the results of M1, M4, and M5,
we can see that enlarging the hidden dimension of layers has a
minor effect on the model’s generalization performance. Third,
compared to M1 and M7, M8 can obtain a better classification
result. It notes that dropout improves the model’s generalization performance. Fourth, comparing M1 with M6, stacking
the MHA blocks decreases model performance. Consequently,
as the AAM module and the LSTM-TFE module are parallelly
designed in the model, the small hidden dimension of the
two modules can result in a reasoned model width. The
deeper depth of networks decreases the model’s generalization
performance. And increasing the dropout rate can improve
model generalization performance. The results show that the
model M9 offers the best performance.

D. Comparative Experiment
1) Comparison Models: Four deep-learning-based models
are used as comparison methods to perform NLOS classification on the two data sets.
1) A multilayer perceptron (MLP) is a fully connected class
of feedforward ANNs. MLP consists of the input layer,
several hidden layers, and the output layer. Rectified
linear unit (ReLU) is adopted as the activation function
in this study. It has been widely used for various
nonlinear fitting tasks. MLP is considered the baseline
model.

2) The FCNN-LSTM model [24] is presented for satellite
visibility and pseudorange error predictions. FCNN represents the fully connected network used to learn the
measurement features of the target satellite. The model
uses LSTM networks to learn aided information for the
task from the captured satellite set/sequence in each
epoch.
3) The transformer-based model (TBM) [26] is proposed
to perform NLOS classification using the self-attention
mechanism to construct the indirect environment
interaction by computing the relevance between the
satellites. And it is a previous work of this study.
4) Our proposed spatiotemporal information-driven crossattention model uses the AAM module to learn the
spatial environmental features and the LSTM-TFE module to learn the temporal features, respectively. The
model then fuses the representation vectors of the two
features with a cross-attention fusion strategy. Moreover,
we impose a learnable sparse regularizer on the model
to reduce feature redundancy.
To give a detailed comparison of these models, Table IV
demonstrates the capabilities of these models. The instantaneous features mean the learned information from the current
measurement of the target signal. The temporal features
denote the historical information of the target signal. The
spatial environment features mean the representation of environmental characteristics learned from the captured satellite
sets/sequences in each epoch. The checked symbol denotes
whether the model is able to learn the features to perform
NLOS classification.
2) Model Training: The hyperparameters of models are
shown in Table V. The hyperparameters of MLP and TBM
are determined based on model variation studies. The hyperparameters of FCNN-LSTM refer to [24]. The loss and accuracy
of models in training processing are shown in Fig. 11(a) and
(b). Some peaks appear on the lines. The reasons can be
clarified twofold. First, since the experimental devices have
some unavoidable measurement errors, all labels cannot be
guaranteed to be absolutely correct. Second, as the satellite
sets/sequences are constructed as the input, some wrong labels
are contained in some specific batches. Thus, there are some

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION-DRIVEN CROSS-ATTENTION MODEL WITH SPARSE REPRESENTATION

31903

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF M ODELS ’ C APABILITIES

TABLE V
H YPERPARAMETERS OF M ODELS

Fig. 11.

(a) Accuracy and (b) loss of models in training.

peaks in the training processing. However, it has no impact on
the training result. From the training processing, we can find
that the models except for MLP can obtain high accuracy in
the training. The loss can converge after about 20 000 steps.
It indicates that the capability to learn the spatial environment
features is a crucial factor for model performance across
multiple locations.
3) Comparison Results: We conducted comparison experiments on two established data sets using MLP, FCNN-LSTM,
TBM, and our proposed model. After training becomes stable,
we repeat the test at three different epochs and average the
results as the final result. The models were trained with
about three epochs in this study. The comparison result for
the in-domain data set is shown in Fig. 12. First of all,
our proposed model outperforms other models. Compared to
the baseline model MLP, our proposed model can improve
classification accuracy by 16% in the in-domain data set.
Recall, Precision, and F1-score can be enhanced by 17%.
Apart from MLP, all other models can obtain more than
95% classification accuracy. From Table IV, we can find that

MLP cannot extract the spatial environmental features, which
results in limited performance. It indicates that obtaining
environmental characteristics is crucial to aid models in NLOS
classification across multiple locations. FCNN-LSTM utilizes
LSTM networks to learn aided information from satellite
sets/sequences. TBM and our proposed model use the selfattention mechanism to obtain environmental characteristics.
Although FCNN-LSTM shows a better result than TBM, the
model scale for FCNN-LSTM is much larger, as shown in
Table V. In light of this, it cannot be proved that the LSTM
network is more efficient than the self-attention mechanism in
learning environmental characteristics. Our proposed model,
fusing the signal temporal feature, appears to generate limited
promotion compared to FCNN-LSTM and TBM. It can be
explained twofold. First, the in-domain data set contains 27
locations, and GNSS signals are recorded for about 18 min at
each location. As there is a long distance between the satellite
and the receiver, satellite signals change minorly within
18 min. Environmental characteristics are a more important
factor in comparison with signal temporal variation. Due to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

31904

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 12.

Comparison results in the in-domain data set. MLP, FCNN-LSTM, TBM, and our proposed model are used as comparison models.

Fig. 13.

Comparison results in the out-domain data set.

Fig. 14.

Confusion matrix of classification results in the in-domain data set. (a) Concate model. (b) Fusion model. (c) Proposed model.

their ability to extract spatial environmental features, FCNNLSTM, TBM, and our proposed model can achieve good
performance in the in-domain data set. The comparison result
for the out-domain data set is shown in Fig. 13. Our proposed

model also obtained superior results than other models in the
out-domain data set. Compared with MLP, the four evaluation
metrics can be improved by more than 7%. The recognition
precision of LOS signals can be 76% in unknown locations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION-DRIVEN CROSS-ATTENTION MODEL WITH SPARSE REPRESENTATION

Fig. 15.

31905

Confusion matrix of classification results in the out-domain data set. (a) Concate model. (b) Fusion model. (c) Proposed model.

Fig. 16. Heatmap of representation vectors. (a) is the heatmap for the Fusion model. (b) is for the proposed model. We used 100 representation vectors to
plot the heatmap. The hidden dimension of vectors is 64. All arguments for the two color bars are the same, and the shade of the color for the color bar
represents the numerical value of the element.

We believe that the complex structures of the FCNN-LSTM
and TBM models enable them to learn the representation
of environmental features. However, this complexity also
makes them more prone to overfitting on the in-domain data
set. Consequently, the MLP model performs better than the
FCNN-LSTM and TBM models in the out-domain. In other
words, environmental characteristics can allow the model to
give a preference for known scenes. Compared to FCNNLSTM, TBM and our proposed model utilize the self-attention
mechanism to learn environmental characteristics, which not
only obtains high precision in the in-domain data set but also
has better generalization performance in the out-domain data
set. It demonstrates that our proposed AAM module has the
capability to extract environmental characteristics from GNSS
measurements effectively.
Fig. 17. Distribution of the representation vectors generated by the Fusion
model and the proposed model. (About 10 000 samples are used.)

In combination with the results from the in-domain data set,
it indicates that our proposed model can be more adaptive in
dealing with dynamic environments and temporal variation.
MLP appears to achieve competitive results.

E. Ablation Study by Changing Different Fusion Strategies
and Moving Out of the Sparse Block
To investigate the contribution of the fusion strategy and
the learnable sparse regularizer on the proposed model’s
performance, we developed three models by changing the
fusion strategy and moving out of the sparse optimization
block. The Concat model uses the AAM module to learn the
spatial environmental features, and the LSTM-TFE module to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

31906

Fig. 18.

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

Classification results based on different time lengths.

learn the temporal features, respectively. It then concatenates
the representation vectors directly. The Fusion model adopts
a cross-attention fusion strategy to integrate both types of
features. Based on the Fusion model, we additionally introduce
a learnable sparse regularizer to obtain the final proposed
model. The experiments are conducted on two data sets.
We compute the confusion matrix of classification results
and compare them to understand the influence of corresponding components on model performance. Fig. 14 shows
the classification result of three models on the in-domain
data set. First, we can see that the Fusion model performs
better than the Concate model in NLOS and LOS signal
recognition. It indicates that the cross-attention fusion strategy
results in more efficient feature fusion. Second, the proposed
model shows further advancements than the Fusion model.
The sparse optimization block improves model performance
by realizing sparse representations. Finally, three models
achieved high-precision classification performance. It implies
that spatiotemporal features can help models perform NLOS
classification across multiple locations. Fig. 15 demonstrates
the classification results of the models in the out-domain data
set. Although the Concate model shows the most impressive
result in NLOS signal recognition, LOS recognition precision
is low. Compared to it, the Fusion model shows better overall
classification performance. Our proposed model, introducing a
learnable sparse regularizer to address feature redundancy, can
achieve better generalization performance than both of them.
Moreover, to understand the role of the sparse representation
more intuitively, we plotted the heatmaps and distributions for
the representation vectors. From Fig. 16, we can see that the
maximum value of vectors generated by the Fusion model
is larger than the one generated by the proposed model.
Compared to the Fusion model, light-colored pixel blocks
appear more frequently in the heatmap for the proposed
model, which means that most representation vector values
reach 0. Fig. 17 demonstrates the distribution of representation

vectors for the two models. Most of the representation vectors
generated by the proposed model focus on around 0. The result
is consistent with Fig. 16. The proposed method results in a
sparse representation vector. The learnable sparse regularizer
can derive a better feature representation to boost NLOS
classification.
F. Time Length of Sliding Window
For the LSTM-TFE module, the input channel is fed with
signal historical epochs. The time length of the input sequence
determines how much historical information the model will
observe. Therefore, we changed the slide window size to
generate input sequences with different time lengths. Fig. 18
shows the test results. With the time length increasing from 6
to 20, the model performance changes. The most impressive
results appear at 8 or 10. The model obtains 76% precision
for LOS recognition in the out-domain data set when the time
length is 10. It indicates that the model cannot extract enough
valuable information from a short time length. By increasing
the time length, the model can learn temporal features more
effectively. However, classification accuracy decreases when
the time length exceeds a reasoned value. As we know,
temporal data often exhibits different tendencies across various
time scales. Thus, a time length exceeding the reasoned value
introduces unnecessary historical information, which prevents
the model from learning the correct patterns.
V. C ONCLUSION
This study aims to model environmental characteristics and signal temporal information, integrating them to
enhance GNSS NLOS classification across multiple locations.
We therefore propose a spatiotemporal information-driven
cross-attention model with sparse representation to extract
spatiotemporal information that can generate accurate NLOS
classification. In particular, the proposed AAM module can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZENG et al.: SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION-DRIVEN CROSS-ATTENTION MODEL WITH SPARSE REPRESENTATION

learn the spatial environmental features successfully by using
the self-attention mechanism to compute relevance among
satellite signals. In addition, the proposed LSTM-TFE module
captures the signal temporal features from historical epochs
effectively. The spatiotemporal information is then obtained
with a cross-attention fusion strategy. Moreover, the adoption of a learnable sparse regularizer reduces the feature
redundancy to realize a sparse representation that improves
the model’s generalization performance. In experiments, we
use real-world data sets collected across multiple urban
canyon locations to test our model. The proposed model can
achieve 98% classification accuracy across multiple locations.
Generalization performance in unknown environments can be
improved by over 7% compared to several state-of-the-art
models. A limitation of our model is that it could not achieve
as high classification accuracy as the in-domain data set when
applying it to the out-domain data set. In future work, we aim
to improve the domain adaptability of the model to overcome
this limitation.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. Janssen, A. Koppert, R. Berkvens, and M. Weyn, “A survey on IoT
positioning leveraging LPWAN, GNSS, and LEO-PNT,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11135–11159, Jul. 2023.
[2] A. Grenier, E. S. Lohan, A. Ometov, and J. Nurmi, “A survey on
low-power GNSS,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 1482–1509, 3rd Quart., 2023.
[3] B. Mao, X. Zhou, J. Liu, and N. Kato, “On an intelligent hierarchical
routing strategy for ultra-dense free space optical low earth orbit satellite
networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1219–1230,
May 2024.
[4] Y. Zhu, B. Mao, and N. Kato, “IRS-aided high-accuracy positioning for
autonomous driving toward 6G: A tutorial,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag.,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 85–92, Mar. 2024.
[5] H. Zhao et al., “Improving performances of GNSS positioning correction
using multiview deep reinforcement learning with sparse representation,” GPS Solut., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1–22, 2024.
[6] H. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Chen, L. Wang, K. Xie, and S. Xie, “Fusing vehicle
trajectories and GNSS measurements to improve GNSS positioning
correction based on actor-critic learning,” in Proc. Int. Tech. Meeting
Inst. Navig. (ITM), 2023, pp. 82–94.
[7] Y. Zhu, B. Mao, and N. Kato, “On a novel high accuracy positioning with
intelligent reflecting surface and unscented Kalman filter for intelligent
transportation systems in B5G,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42,
no. 1, pp. 68–77, Jan. 2024.
[8] L. Wang, P. D. Groves, and M. K. Ziebart, “Smartphone shadow matching for better cross-street GNSS positioning in urban environments,” J.
Navig., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 411–433, 2015.
[9] S. Bauer, M. Obst, and G. Wanielik, “3D environment modeling for
GPS multipath detection in urban areas,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Multi-Conf.
Syst., Signals Devices. (SSD), 2012, pp. 1–5.
[10] L.-T. Hsu, Y. Gu, and S. Kamijo, “3D building model-based pedestrian
positioning method using gps/glonass/qzss and its reliability calculation,” GPS Solut., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 413–428, 2016.
[11] F. van Diggelen, “End game for urban GNSS: Google’s use of 3D
building models,” Inside GNSS, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 42–49, 2021.
[12] L.-T. Hsu, “GNSS multipath detection using a machine learning
approach,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC),
2017, pp. 1–6.
[13] B. Xu, Q. Jia, Y. Luo, and L.-T. Hsu, “Intelligent GPS L1
LOS/multipath/NLOS classifiers based on correlator-, RINEX-and
NMEA-level measurements,” Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 16, p. 1851,
2019.
[14] E. Munin, A. Blais, and N. Couellan, “Convolutional neural network for
multipath detection in GNSS receivers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell.
Data Anal. Air Transp., 2020, pp. 1–10.
[15] T. Suzuki and Y. Amano, “NLOS multipath classification of GNSS
signal correlation output using machine learning,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 7,
p. 2503, 2021.

31907

[16] Y. Quan, L. Lau, G. W. Roberts, X. Meng, and C. Zhang, “Convolutional
neural network based multipath detection method for static and kinematic GPS high precision positioning,” Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 12,
p. 2052, 2018.
[17] J. Yue, B. Xu, and L.-T. Hsu, “Data denoising based on Hadamard
matrix transformation and rayleigh quotient maximization: Application
to GNSS signal classification,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71,
pp. 1–11, Jun. 2022.
[18] Y. Sun and L. Fu, “Stacking ensemble learning for non-line-of-sight
detection of global navigation satellite system,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, Apr. 2022.
[19] H. Gao and P. D. Groves, “Environmental context detection for adaptive
navigation using GNSS measurements from a smartphone,” Navig., J.
Inst. Navig., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–116, 2018.
[20] H. Xu, L.-T. Hsu, D. Lu, and B. Cai, “Sky visibility estimation
based on GNSS satellite visibility: an approach of GNSS-based context
awareness,” GPS Solut., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1–15, 2020.
[21] Y. Wang, J. Xu, R. Yang, and X. Zhan, “GNSS multipath detection based
on decision tree algorithm in urban canyons,” in Proc. China Satell.
Navig. Conf. (CSNC), 2021, pp. 375–383.
[22] Y. Tao et al., “Real-time multipath mitigation in multi-GNSS short
baseline positioning via CNN-LSTM method,” Math. Probl. Eng.,
vol. 2021, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[23] H. Su, B. Wu, and X. Mao, “Non-line-of-sight multipath detection
method for bds/gps fusion system based on deep learning,” J. Shanghai
Jiaotong Univ. Sci., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 844–854, 2022.
[24] G. Zhang, P. Xu, H. Xu, and L.-T. Hsu, “Prediction on the urban gnss
measurement uncertainty based on deep learning networks with long
short-term memory,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 18, pp. 20563–20577,
Sep. 2021.
[25] A. Blais, N. Couellan, and E. Munin, “A novel image representation of
GNSS correlation for deep learning multipath detection,” Array, vol. 14,
Jul. 2022, Art. no. 100167.
[26] Z. Li, K. Zeng, L. Wang, X. Kan, R. Yuan, and S. Xie, “NLOS/LOS
classification by constructing indirect environment interaction from
GNSS receiver measurements using a transformer-based deep learning model,” in Proc. Int. Tech. Meeting Inst. Navig. (ITM), 2023,
pp. 859–870.
[27] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 27,
2014, pp. 1–9.
[28] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[29] S. Ahmad and L. Scheinkman, “How can we be so dense? The benefits
of using highly sparse representations,” 2019, arXiv:1903.11257.
[30] Z. Li, J. Tang, H. Zhao, C. Chen, and S. Xie, “Dictionary
learning-structured reinforcement learning with adaptive-sparsity regularizer,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 60, no. 2,
pp. 1753–1769, Apr. 2024.
[31] J. Wright, A. Y. Yang, A. Ganesh, S. S. Sastry, and Y. Ma, “Robust face
recognition via sparse representation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 210–227, Feb. 2009.
[32] K. Huang and S. Aviyente, “Sparse representation for signal classification,” in Proc. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst., vol. 19, 2006, pp. 1–8.
[33] Z. Li, Y. Xie, K. Zeng, S. Xie, and B. T. Kumara, “Adaptive sparsityregularized deep dictionary learning based on lifted proximal operator
machine,” Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 260, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 110123.
[34] D. Hazarika, S. Gorantla, S. Poria, and R. Zimmermann, “Self-attentive
feature-level fusion for multimodal emotion detection,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Multimedia Inf. Process. Retr. (MIPR), 2018, pp. 196–201.
[35] Z. Li et al., “BEVFormer: Learning bird’s-eye-view representation from
multi-camera images via spatiotemporal transformers,” in Proc. Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 1–18.
[36] C.-F. R. Chen, Q. Fan, and R. Panda, “CrossViT: Cross-attention multiscale vision transformer for image classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 357–366.
[37] T. Xu, W. Chen, P. Wang, F. Wang, H. Li, and R. Jin, “CDTrans:
Cross-domain transformer for unsupervised domain adaptation,” 2021,
arXiv:2109.06165.
[38] R. C. Staudemeyer and E. R. Morris, “Understanding LSTM—A
tutorial into long short-term memory recurrent neural networks,” 2019,
arXiv:1909.09586.
[39] S. Ruder, “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms,”
2016, arXiv:1609.04747.
[40] D.-J. Jwo, M. Hsieh, and Y. Lee, “GPS navigation solution using the
iterative least absolute deviation approach,” Sci. Iran. B, vol. 22, no. 6,
pp. 2103–2111, 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

31908

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 19, 1 OCTOBER 2024

[41] I. K. M. Jais, A. R. Ismail, and S. Q. Nisa, “Adam optimization algorithm
for wide and deep neural network,” Knowl. Eng. Data Sci., vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 41–46, 2019.
[42] J. Lever, “Classification evaluation: It is important to understand both
what a classification metric expresses and what it hides,” Nat Methods.,
vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 603–605, 2016.
[43] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and
R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–1958,
2014.

Kungan Zeng received the bachelor’s degree
from the Department of Civil Engineering, Hunan
University of Technology, Zhuzhou, China, in 2014,
the master’s degree from the School of Civil
Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou,
China, in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree from the
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan, in 2018.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with
the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Zhuhai, China. His current research
interests include deep learning, GNSS positioning, and natural language
processing.

Zhenni Li received the B.Sc. degree from the School
of Physical Science and Electronics, Shanxi Datong
University, Datong, China, in 2009, the M.Sc. degree
from the School of Physics and Optoelectronic,
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China, in
2012, and the Ph.D. degree from the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan, in 2015.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Automation, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China, where she is also
with Guangdong–Hong Kong–Macao Joint Laboratory for Smart Discrete
Manufacturing. Her research interests include deep learning, reinforcement
learning, and high-precious positioning.

Haoli Zhao received the B.Sc. degree in nuclear
physics from the College of Physical Science and
Technology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in
2012, the M.Sc. degree in nuclear environmental
science and technology from the Department of
Material, Sheffield University, Sheffield, U.K., in
2014, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
and engineering from the Graduate Department of
Computer and Information System, University of
Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan, in 2019.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin,
China. His current research interests focus on sparse representation, deep
learning, reinforcement learning, and GNSS positioning in detail.

Kan Xie (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in control science and engineering from Guangdong
University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in
2017.
After that, he joined the Institute of Intelligent
Information Processing, Guangdong University of
Technology, where he is currently an Associate
Professor. His research interests include machine
learning, nonnegative signal processing, blind signal
processing, smart grid, and Internet of Things.

Shengli Xie (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
in mathematics from Jilin University, Changchun,
China, in 1983, the M.S. degree in mathematics from
Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China,
in 1995, and the Ph.D. degree in control theory
and applications from the South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 1997.
He is currently a Full Professor and the Head of
the Institute of Intelligent Information Processing,
Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou.
He has co-authored two books and over 150 research
papers in refereed journals and conference proceedings. His research interests
include blind signal processing, machine learning, and Internet of Things.
Prof. Xie was awarded the Second Prize of National Natural Science Award
of China in 2009. He was awarded the Highly Cited Researcher in 2020. He
is an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND
C YBERNETICS : S YSTEMS. He is a Foreign Full Member (Academician) of
the Russian Academy of Engineering.
Dusit Niyato (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree from King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology
Ladkrabang, Bangkok, Thailand, in 1999, and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
from the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB,
Canada, in 2008.
He is a Professor with the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore. His research interests are in
the areas of sustainability, edge intelligence, decentralized machine learning, and incentive mechanism
design.
Wuhui Chen (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s degree from Northeast University, Shenyang,
China, in 2008, and the master’s and Ph.D. degrees
from the University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan,
in 2011 and 2014, respectively.
From 2014 to 2016, he was a Research Fellow
with Japan Society for the Promotion of Science,
Tokyo, Japan. From 2016 to 2017, he was a
Researcher with the University of Aizu. He is
currently an Associate Professor with Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. His current research
interests include edge/cloud computing, cloud robotics, and blockchain.
Zibin Zheng (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
and M.Phil. degrees in computer science from Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China, in 2005 and
2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from The
Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK), Hong
Kong, China, in 2010.
He is currently a Professor and the Deputy Dean
of the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yatsen University, Guangzhou, China. He authored or
co-authored more than 200 international journal and
conference papers, including one ESI hot paper and
ten ESI highly cited papers. According to Google Scholar, his papers have
more than 28 000 citations. His research interests include blockchain, software
engineering, and services computing.
Dr. Zheng was the recipient of several awards, including the Top 50
Influential Papers in Blockchain of 2018, the ACM SIGSOFT Distinguished
Paper Award at ICSE2010, and the Best Student Paper Award at ICWS2010.
He was the BlockSys’19 and CollaborateCom16 General Co-Chair of SC2’19
and ICIOT18 and the IoV14 PC Co-Chair. He is a Fellow of IET.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Southeast University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:23:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

